>> Richard Feldman: Let's move on to
the final step, generating web assembly.
So in this section we're gonna
talk about a couple of things.
So first we're gonna talk about generating
bytecode, and this is going to be sort of
a bookend to the middle section, which is
gonna be a little bit more freeform than
these other sections have been,
which is a code tour.
We're basically just going to look through
and I'm just going to talk through a bunch
of stuff and feel free to ask questions
about our WASM implementation here.
And then finally, we're gonna talk a
little bit about the detail of generating
polymorphic functions.
I mentioned earlier there are some
complications when it comes to this beyond
the type complications.
So we're gonna talk about those after
the code tour because we're not actually,
because it's complicated,
I've chosen not to implement that overall.
There's multiple ways to do it, but we've
chosen not to do any of them in in this.
So basically, what we're gonna do is we're
gonna talk a little bit upfront about,
sort of general concepts
of generating byte code.
Then most of what we're gonna talk about
right here is we're just gonna walk
through the code and talk through at
a very high level what it's doing.
And then feel free to ask questions.
And then we're gonna get back and
talk about polymorphic functions.
The main point of this course is
all the stuff building up to this.
As we're gonna see in a second, once you
get the basic idea of this, I think that's
the vast majority of the benefit,
at least for the purposes of this course,
is just kind of understanding
how does this actually work?
And you can get the idea pretty quickly,
I think,
based on what we've already learned.
Okay, as we've talked about before,
we have this recurring theme.
And this will be the last time the theme
recurs, because this is the last section,
of traversing input and generating output.
So start off with source string, do some
lexing, get out some tokens, take tokens,
parse them, we get a parse tree, do some
naming on that, and then we get scope
involved, do some type inference on that,
and then we get back our type database.
And now we are finally ready for the final
stage, which is taking the parse tree and
Code Gen to a string.
Just kidding, that's not what we're
doing now, that's what we already did.
What we already did when we did formatting
was we basically ran through these steps.
And okay, granted, we didn't have
naming and type inference there.
But we could, if we wanted to,
choose to do those.
If you wanna do, you could have
your format or be like, yeah,
tell me about naming errors and
tell me about all the types.
It's not gonna use them,
it doesn't need them.
Those are sort of optional as
far as the format is concerned.
But fundamentally,
you could just do all these steps if
you wanted to with the formatter.
And then, of course, if you wanted to take
it an actual step further, then we would,
instead of generating a string at the end,
because it's a formatter, we would keep
everything else the same, except that now
we are generating WebAssembly bytecode.
And you might have noticed I
did sneak something in here,
which was the formatter only cares
about the parse tree as its input.
But if we're generating WebAssembly
Bytecode, we actually do need to know that
type database, because finally, [LAUGH] it
has come to pass that we do finally get
some value out of storing all of
those IDs in our parse tree nodes,
way back in the day [LAUGH],
when we were back at section two.
Now we finally get to use them.
So now the fact that we have those
IDs in our parse tree nodes and
we have this fully populated Type DB means
that not only do we know the structure of
the nodes, where's the conditionals, where
are the functions defined, yada yada, but
also we know what the types of absolutely
every single thing in our program is.
We know the type of everything.
There is nothing in our program where
the type is a mystery to us at this point,
because we did complete type
inference on all of it.
So now ready to generate some
WebAssembly byte code and that's good,
because WebAssembly Bytecode is tight.
WebAssembly actually requires you
to explicitly specify the types.
Some byte codes do not, but machine code
also doesn't require that you specify, but
it does require that you know it because
if you don't know it or you get it wrong,
bad things happen.
[LAUGH] So essentially, whether you're
going to WebAssembly Bytecode or
machine code, you basically need to know
your types at this point, or you need to
do something like the aforementioned
other languages that will do some,
runtime extra work, where they will wrap
up the type information around the thing.
So you'll have not only is this a string,
but there's also a little piece of
information hanging off the side
that says, I'm a string.
And so if you know where that little piece
of extra information is consistently,
you can go ask at runtime, but
of course there's performance implications
to that and all that good stuff.
So because we have all of our types,
we don't need to do that at runtime.
We already know what all the types are and
we can just tell it to Webassembly
directly and have it run faster.
Okay, now it is time for
the WebAssembly code tour.
So basically what I'm gonna do is I'm just
gonna sort of walk through our solution
here and if you take a peek ahead, I guess
you're gonna peak, you could always cheat.
But looking at the exercise, we might end
up going through the thing that is in
the exercise anyway, but we only have
this one WebAssembly implementation.
So here we go,
let's take a look through it.
So fundamentally, what WebAssembly is
doing is to recap what we said at the very
beginning, what you end up with when you
have code generated some web assemblies,
you end up with a whole bunch of bytes.
There's a bunch of ones and zeros.
If you try to read them as a human,
you look at that and you go,
this is a bunch of gibberish.
I always see a string ther, I see a string
there, okay, but then more gibberish,
I don't really know what
to make of any of this.
This is not designed to be human readable,
what it's designed to be is to be
streamed efficiently over the network.
That's really what its job is.
So it can be decoded over the network
as it's coming in, and then translated
directly, or JITed, just in time,
compiled directly into machine code.
So like I said, the reason that we're,
the main reason that we're doing
this in WebAssembly rather than
in machine code, is number one,
if we did it in machine code, then it'd
have to have a different version for
everybody's different
machine that you're running.
So I'd have to have a version of this for
X8664 Intel machines, and another one for
64 bit ARM machines.
And the amount of work that would have to
go into this section is a lot bigger, but
also just because WebAssembly honestly,
is a little bit simpler to
understand than those things.
A lot of those architectures are very old,
they have all the legacy stuff going on,
whereas WebAssembly is a lot more modern,
and
the way it's organized is
a little bit more streamlined.
Question, yeah?
So in this case, we'd be taking advantage
of compiling to WebAssembly, because
the folks who did WebAssembly took care
of the rest of it for us, is that right?
Well, I don't know if I would say it's
that they took care of the rest of
it for us.
It's more just that for their particular
goals, one of WebAssembly's goals is that
you could have this bytecode that anyone
could compile to, much like JVM bytecode,
and then it can be translated
efficiently to any
individual like actual
hardware architecture.
So because they did that work,
they ended up with making different design
decisions than the hardware designers did,
because they're just dealing
withdifferent trade offs.
Really easy example of this is,
we can go into this if you're curious, but
basically WebAssembly is
designed as a stack machine,
which essentially means that
the way that WebAssembly sort
of manages its own memory is pretty
much one to one with the exact push and
pop the stack stuff that we were
doing ourselves back in part 2.
And then, I guess again, in part three.
Whereas the hardware does
not have that concept.
If you wanna stack, you have to manage
that yourself in a much more complicated
way than what we or
what WebAssembly are doing.
But since, of course,
we wanna have functions, it's pretty
nice to be able to have access to that.
Anyway, so WebAssembly files
are organized into sections.
So the first type is types,
then functions, then memory, exports,
code and data.
These sections, as Chris mentioned,
they come in streaming, right, so
the first section,
right up front is types.
So when I say WebAssembly is a typed
system, if you're streaming this over
the network, it's right up front,
tell me what all your types are.
Basically, these are kind of type
aliases where you're saying,
I want to give a name to a particular
type or stuff like that.
That's the very first thing that comes
across the wire, then your functions,
then some global memory,
and then things export.
So WebAssembly can export things
to JavaScript, the actual code.
So this is the bulk of what we're
going to actually be looking at.
And then some actual data that read
only memory that can go with that.
Worth noting that these all have
numbers associated with them.
So this is a very, very common, recurring
theme that we're gonna see here is just
that there are magic numbers all over
the place, and they correspond to things.
And when we're emitting WebAssembly
bytecode, we need to know
which magic numbers to emit in the right
places in order to get to work.
So this is in some ways similar to
the format that we did in the sense that
in the formatter,
we were traversing our parse nodes and
then printing out some strings.
Same exact thing here.
We're traversing our parse nodes and
we're printing out, well, not strings,
magic numbers basically.
That's the fundamental difference here.
So if you're not familiar
with this notation,
this is hexadecimal integer notation.
It's pretty common when you see
manuals for things like WebAssembly or
CPU manuals.
They use this hexadecimal notation.
If we were a more elaborate language and
we had fancier types,
we would support more types.
But this is basically just a list of
[LAUGH] here are all the WebAssembly types
that we use and care about.
So we care about i32 which don't worry
about it, we're using it for Booleans,
that's it.
F64, that's basically a 64-bit
floating point number.
That's the classic Javascript number so
this is going to correspond to our number
type, these are both for functions.
This is for a reference to a function,
when you're passing it around,
this is the actual function
definition itself.
And then finally they have a special
magic number for void, which is basically
when you empty block type or you don't
have a function with n obody essentially.
These magic numbers, we can kind of
see where these come up in here.
Yeah, sure, here's an example.
If we are encoding, what is this?
Yeah, right, parameters.
Right, so another detail,
like I mentioned at the beginning,
we are working on a subset of Javascript
here, not just in terms of types, but
also in terms of what co-generation
capabilities we're supporting here.
So there are a lot of things that are a
lot easier to type check than they are to
actually implement in pure WebAssembly.
And again, since this is for learning
purposes, we didn't really go all the way
and implement our full type
system as limited as it is.
But yes, I just decided we're just
only gonna support F64 params, so
we should say number, that's it.
You can have any param type you
want as long as it's a number.
So yeah, basically,
this is how you tell WebAssembly,
I am going to make a new sort of
type annotation for this function.
When you're saying,
I want to specify this is a function type,
you do types.func, which was this
magic number, 0x60 in hexadecimal.
And then when you wanna say, and by
the way, this thing returns an F64 type,
that is this magic number.
So what's actually getting emitted here?
When we are printing this out,
this is basically the same
thing that we're doing here.
When we say concatBytes, this is a string
concat except instead of concatenating
strings together for the formatter,
we were concatenating bytes together.
And instead of the strings that we're
concatenating together being the familiar
syntax that we had in the input in the
first place, instead we were concatenating
together are these magical number like
bytes that just happen to go together.
So this thing right here, I mean, could
just be essentially the same thing as,
I don't know, let's say we had some
argument's a bad example, whatever,
some sort of lambda here, right?
I don't know, b+1, something like that.
That's what we do in the formatter is
we're concantenating these together to
develop the string,
it's exact the same thing here except
that we're concantenating together bytes.
And instead of familiar strings,
it's these sort of strange
looking magical numbers.
And so
there are some other differences here.
Obviously, I mentioned
the stack machine before.
When you're compiling or
transfiling to a human readable language,
you tend to get with that a lot of
ergonomics that save you a lot of time.
So you may recall we talked through that
syntax sugar example where it was like we
invented this plus, plus, plus operator,
and then we de-sugared it to x = x + 2.
There's a lot of that type of thing going
on in here where basically it's like,
okay, conceptually I want this to be,
I don't know.
I want this to be something that, there's
just a function for that in JavaScript,
and if I were compiling JavaScript,
I would just call that function.
But WebAssembly doesn't have that, so
I have to actually implement
that function by scratch.
It has to sort of give it the raw,
de-sugared,
unfiltered version because I just
don't have the convenience there.
That category of thing, I would
mainly classify as an inconvenience.
It's just the same thing aswhen there's
a library, you don't have access to, fine,
I gotta write it myself.
I would say, and then also, when it comes
to concatenating these two together,
it's also just magic number constants
instead of magic string constants.
The string constants are maybe
a little more intuitive, but
fundamentally it's not that different.
Mainly the way that this,
I would say, feels different to me,
is just when things need to
be organized differently.
If we were putting together, I don't know,
let's see what's, sure, okay, so
the import section, right?
So here's an example of something where
WebAssembly has this concept of imports,
and basically, any kind of stuff that you
want to import from the host environment.
In this example, we're using console.log.
You don't get to just say, I'm just
gonna call console.log because that's on
the window object like
you can in Javascript.
You actually have to declare upfront,
hey, host language, Javascript,
here are all the things that
I want to import from you.
I want to access from you.
And in order to give it
a flat list of those,
that means that you need to have already
prepared that list ahead of time,
which in turn means that you need to have
traversed your entire parse tree and
found every single instance of
whenever we're doing console log or
whatever it is in our language that
we want to import from JavaScript.
All of that work has to be
done in a separate pass, or
if we want to avoid a separate pass,
we have to do that trick that we kind of
talked about way back in
the formatting section.
Where, as we're going along, we sort of
write down, yes, I just saw a console.ly,
let me write that down.
That's gonna be needed for
the import section later.
And then when you actually
get to this point,
you have to sort of gather it up and
do it.
So these are the types of things that I
would say feel like the biggest part of
doing code generation, not to a human
readable language, but rather to bytecode,
is just they just have different rules
about how they want things to be placed.
And sometimes that requires structural
changes that you wouldn't otherwise
normally need to do, in addition to
the inconveniences of helper functions
not being there and
you have to write things out, and
the inconvenience of the magic numbers
other than the familiar strengths.
But I mean,
the good news is that fundamentally,
from a learning perspective,
all of those things, I think,
are pretty close at hand,
once you've done a formatter.
It's not that far of a leap, I would say.
It's really just okay, well,
you got to learn about that import
section thing that we just talked about.
You got to learn about the whole,
this is the Type section.
You got to have your your
types in order for that.
Once you understand like the sort of list
of things that you need to do differently
in the WebAssembly world, or in the x8664
world, or in the LLVM world, all of these
things are in the category of what
people tend to call compiler back ends.
So the compiler back end is basically
the thing that's responsible for
the code generation piece and the compiler
frontend is essentially the other stuff
that we're doing, the type checking,
the analysis, the parsing, and all that.
So I guess being here at Frontend Masters,
it's only appropriate that we sort
of relegated the backend portion of
the compiler to the very end
[LAUGH] of the workshop.
Having said all that, so
this basically is essentially our
whirlwind tour of this code base.
If you want, there's quite
a lot here to get this to work.
But really, you can even get some bit
shifts in there if you're into that kind
of thing,
also something we did in the C course.
But basically, the whole purpose of all
of this is just building up to being able
to actually run our Node.js tests, as we
have been doing all these other things,
because Node.js does
support wasm execution.